COMPUTER ETHICS Computers are involved to some extent in almost every aspect of our lives. They often perform life-critical tasks. Computer science is not regulated to the extent of medicine, air travel, or contruction zoning. Therefore, we need to carefully consider the issues of ethics. Definition of Ethics Ethics is a set of beliefs about right and wrong behavior within a society. Ethical behavior conforms to generally accepted norms – many of which are almost universal. However, although nearly everyone would agree that certain behaviors – such as lying and cheating – are unethical, opinions about what constitutes ethical behaviors can vary dramatically. People also develop habits that make it easier for them to choose between what society considers good or bad. A virtue is a habit that inclines people to do what is acceptable, and a vice is a habot of unacceptable behavior. Fairness, generosity, and loyalty are examples of virtues, while vanity, greed, envy, and anger are considered vices. People’s virtues and vices help define their personal value system – the complex scheme of moral values by which they live. The Importance of Integrity A person who acts with integrity acts in accordance with a personal code of principles. One approach to acting with integrity – one cornerstones of ethical behavior – is to extend to all people the same respecet and consideration that you expect to receive from others. Unfortunately, consistency can be difficult to achieve, particularly when you are ina situation that conflicts with your moral standards. Sometimes you are forced to compromise one of your principles and act with an apparent lack of integrity. Clearly, many ethical delimmas are not as simple as right versus wrong but involve choices between right versus right. Ethics is the basis of ttrust and cooperation in relationships with others. The Difference Between Morals, Ethics, and Laws Morals are one’s personal beliefs about right and wrong, while the term ethics describes standards or codes of behavior expected of an individual by a group (nation, organization, profession) to which an individual belongs. Law is a system of rules that tells us what we can and cannot do. Laws are enforced by a set of institutions (the police, courts, law-making bodies). Legal acts are acts that conform to the law. Moral acts conform to what an individual believes to be the right thing to do. Laws can proclaim an act as legal, although many people may consider the act immoral—for example, abortion. Ethical Principals Ethical principals are tools which are used to think through difficult situation. There are three useful ethical principals: • An act is ethical if all society benefits from the act. • An act is ethical if people are treated as an end and not as a means to an end. • An act ie ethical if it is fair to all parties involved. Computer Ethics Computer ethics are morally acceptable use of computers (i.e., using computers appropriately). Standards or guidelines are important in this industry, bacause technology changes are outstripping the legal system’s ability to keep up. Ethics for Computer Professionals Computer professionals: • Are experrts in their field, • Know customers rely on their knowledge, expertise, and honesty, • Understand their products (and related risks) affect many people, • Follow good professional standards and practices, • Maintain an expected level of competence and are up-to-date on current knowledge and technology, • Educate the non-computer professional. Computer Ethics Primary Issues • Privacy – responsibility to protect data about individuals • Accuracy – responsibility of data collectors to authenticate information and ensure its accuracy • Property – who owns information and software and how they can be sold and exchanged • Access – responsibility of data collectors to control access and determine what information a person has the right to obtain about others and how the information can be used U.S. Federal Privacy Laws General Federal Privacy Laws: • Freedom of Information Act, 1968 • Privacy Act of 1974 • Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 • Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988 • Computer Security Act of 1987 • Federal Internet Privacy Protection Act of 1997 Privacy Laws affecting Private Institutions: • Fair Credit Reporting Act, 1970 • Right To Financial Privacy Act Of 1978 • Privacy Protection Act Of 1980 • Cable Communications Policy Act Of 1984 • Electronic Communications Privacy Act Of 1986 • Video Privacy Protection Act Of 1988 • Consumer Internet Privacy Protection Act Of 1997 • Communications Privacy & Consumer Empowerment Act Of 1997 • Data Privacy Act Of 1997 Philippines Privacy Laws • Republic Act 10173 (Data Privacy Act of 2012) • Republic Act 8293 (Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines or the Copyright Law) • Republic Act 10175 (The Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012) Common Ethical Issues for IT Users • Problems with Large Databases o Thus, spreading information without consent wherein some large companies use medical records and credit records as a factor in important personnel decisions o Also, spreading inaccurate infromation where mistakes in one computer file can easily migrate to others. Inaccurate data may linger for years. • General Internet Issues o Inflammatory interchange of messages via internet (email, chat rooms, social media, etc.) o Chain Mail o Virus warning hoaxes o “Spam” – unsolicited, bulk email 3 | P a g e C S 1 1 1 – I n t r o d u c t i o n t o C o m p u t i n g • Email Netiquette o Promptly respond to messages o Delete messages after you read them if you don’t need to save information o Don’t send messages you wouldn’t others to read o Keep the message short and straight to the point. o Don’t type in all capital letters o Be careful with sarcasm and humor in your message • Internet Content and Free Speech Issues o Information on internet includes hate, violence, and information that is harmful for children. How much of this should be regulated?Do filters solve problems or create more? Is web site information used for course work and research reliable? • Information Ownership Issues o Illegal software copying (pirating) o Infringement of copyrights by copying of pictures or text from web pages o Plagiarism by copying text from other sources when original work is expected Terms: ✓ Intellectual Property – intangible creationns protected by law ✓ Trade secret – intellectual work or products belonging to a business, not in public domain ✓ Copyright – statutory grant protecting intellectual property from copying by others for 28 years ✓ Patent – legal document granting owner exclusive monopoly on an invention for 17 years • Copyright Laws o Software developers (or the companies they work for) own their programs. o Software buyers only own the right to use the software according to the license agreement. o No copying, reselling, lending, renting, leasing, or distributing is legal without the software owner’s permission. • Software Licenses o There are four types of software licenses: ▪ Public Domain - Public domain software has no owner and is not protected by copyright law. It was either created with public funds, or the ownership was forfeited by the creator. It can be copied, sold, and/or modified. Often is of poor quality/unreliable. ▪ Freeware - is copyrighted software that is licensed to be copied and distributed without charge. Freeware is free, but it’s still under the owner’s control. Example: Eudroa Light and Netscape. ▪ Shareware - A shareware software license allows you to use the software for a trial period, but you must pay a registration fee to the owner for permanent use. Some shareware trials expire on a certain date. Payment depends on the honor system. Purchasing (the right to use) the software may also get you a version with more powerful features and published documentation. ▪ All Rights Reserved - May be used by the purchaser according the exact details spelled out in the license agreement. You can’t legally use it--or even possess it-- without the owner’s permission. • Software Piracy o SPA (Software Publishers Association) polices software piracy and mainly targets: ▪ Illegal duplication ▪ Sale of copyrighted software ▪ Companies that purchase single copies and load the software on multiple computers or networks o They rely on whistle-blowers. o Penalties (for primary user of PC) may include fines up to $250,000 and/or imprisonment up to 5 years in jail. • System Quality o Bug-free software is difficult to produce. It must be carefully designed, developed, and tested. Mistakes generated by computers can be far reaching. Commenting and documenting software is required for effective maintenance throughout the life of the program. ▪ Ethical Issues: When is software, system or service ready for release? ▪ Social Issues: Can people trust quality of software, systems, services, data? ▪ Political Issues: Should congress or industry develop standards for software, hardware, data quality? • Computer Crime o Computer criminals are using a computer to commit an illegal act. Who are computer criminals? ▪ Employees – disgruntled or dishonest – the largest category ▪ Outside users – customers or suppliers ▪ “Hackers” and “crackers” – haackers do it “for fun” but crackers have malicious intent ▪ Organized crime – tracking illegal enterprises, forgery, and counterfeiting o Types of Computer Crime: ▪ Damage to computers, programs or files • Viruses – migrate through systems attached to files and programs • Worms – continuously self-replicate ▪ Theft • Of hardware, software, data, computer time • Software piracy (unauthorized copies of copyrighted material) ▪ View or Manipulation • “unauthorized entry” and “Harmless message” still illegal • Computer Security o This involves protecting: ▪ the information, hardware, and software; ▪ from unauthorized use and damage, and ▪ from sabotage and natural disasters o Measures to protect computer security: ▪ Restricting access both to the hardware locations (physical access) and into the system itself (over the network) using firewalls ▪ Implementing a plan to prevent break-ins ▪ Changing passwords frequently ▪ Making backup copies ▪ Using anti-virus software ▪ Encrypting data to frustrate interception ▪ Anticipating disasters (disaster recovery plan) ▪ Hiring trustworthy employees Computer Ethics for Computer Professionals • Competence– Professionals keep up with the latest knowledge in their field and perform services only in their area of competence. • Responsibility– Professionals are loyal to their clients or employees, and they won’t disclose confidential information. • Integrity– Professionals express their opinions based on facts, and they are impartial in their judgments. Professional Organizations No one IT professional organization has emerged as preeminent, so there is no universal code of ethics for IT workers. However, the existence of such organizations is useful in a field that is rapidly growing and changing. Four of the most prominent IT-related professional organizations are: • Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) - is a computing society founded in 1947 with over 97,000 student and professional members in more than 100 countries. It is international in scope—with an ACM Europe, ACM India, and ACM China organization. • Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Computer Society (IEEE-CS) - covers the broad fields of electrical, electronic, and information technologies and sciences. The IEEE-CS is one of the oldest and largest IT professional associations, with about 85,000 members. • Association of Information Technology Professionals (AITP) - started in Chicago in 1951. They were members of a local group called the Machine Accountants Association (MAA), which first evolved into the Data Processing Management Association in 1962 and finally the AITP in 1996. • SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security (SANS) Institute - The SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security (SANS) Institute provides information security training and certification for a wide range of individuals, such as auditors, network administrators, and security managers. The ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct (https://www.acm.org/code-of-ethics) Computing professionals' actions change the world. To act responsibly, they should reflect upon the wider impacts of their work, consistently supporting the public good. The ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct ("the Code") expresses the conscience of the profession. The Code is designed to inspire and guide the ethical conduct of all computing professionals, including current and aspiring practitioners, instructors, students, influencers, and anyone who uses computing technology in an impactful way. 1. GENERAL ETHICAL PRINCIPLES. A computing professional should… a. Contribute to society and to human well-being, acknowledging that all people are stakeholders in computing. b. Avoid harm. c. Be honest and trustworthy. d. Be fair and take action not to discriminate. e. Respect the work required to produce new ideas, inventions, creative works, and computing artifacts. f. Respect privacy. g. Honor confidentiality. 2. PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES. A computing professional should… a. Strive to achieve high quality in both the processes and products of professional work. b. Maintain high standards of professional competence, conduct, and ethical practice. c. Know and respect existing rules pertaining to professional work. d. Accept and provide appropriate professional review. e. Give comprehensive and thorough evaluations of computer systems and their impacts, including analysis of possible risks. f. Perform work only in areas of competence. g. Foster public awareness and understanding of computing, related technologies, and their consequences. h. Access computing and communication resources only when authorized or when compelled by the public good. i. Design and implement systems that are robustly and usably secure. 3. PROFESSIONAL LEADERSHIP PRINCIPLES. A computing professional, especially one acting as a leader, should... a. Ensure that the public good is the central concern during all professional computing work. b. Articulate, encourage acceptance of, and evaluate fulfillment of social responsibilities by members of the organization or group. c. Manage personnel and resources to enhance the quality of working life. d. Articulate, apply, and support policies and processes that reflect the principles of the Code. e. Create opportunities for members of the organization or group to grow as professionals. f. Use care when modifying or retiring systems. g. Recognize and take special care of systems that become integrated into the infrastructure of society. The Ten Commandments of computer ethics have been defined by the Computer Ethics Institute. 1. Thou shalt not use a computer to harm other people: If it is unethical to harm people by making a bomb, for example, it is equally bad to write a program that handles the timing of the bomb. Or, to put it more simply, if it is bad to steal and destroy other people’s books and notebooks, it is equally bad to access and destroy their files. 2. Thou shalt not interfere with other people's computer work: Computer viruses are small programs that disrupt other people’s computer work by destroying their files, taking 7 | P a g e C S 1 1 1 – I n t r o d u c t i o n t o C o m p u t i n g huge amounts of computer time or memory, or by simply displaying annoying messages. Generating and consciously spreading computer viruses is unethical. 3. Thou shalt not snoop around in other people's files: Reading other people’s e-mail messages is as bad as opening and reading their letters: This is invading their privacy. Obtaining other people’s non-public files should be judged the same way as breaking into their rooms and stealing their documents. Text documents on the Internet may be protected by encryption. 4. Thou shalt not use a computer to steal: Using a computer to break into the accounts of a company or a bank and transferring money should be judged the same way as robbery. It is illegal and there are strict laws against it. 5. Thou shalt not use a computer to bear false witness: The Internet can spread untruth as fast as it can spread truth. Putting out false "information" to the world is bad. For instance, spreading false rumors about a person or false propaganda about historical events is wrong. 6. Thou shalt not use or copy software for which you have not paid: Software is an intellectual product. In that way, it is like a book: Obtaining illegal copies of copyrighted software is as bad as photocopying a copyrighted book. There are laws against both. Information about the copyright owner can be embedded by a process called watermarking into pictures in the digital format. 7. Thou shalt not use other people's computer resources without authorization: Multiuser systems use user id’s and passwords to enforce their memory and time allocations, and to safeguard information. You should not try to bypass this authorization system. Hacking a system to break and bypass the authorization is unethical. 8. Thou shalt not appropriate other people's intellectual output: For example, the programs you write for the projects assigned in this course are your own intellectual output. Copying somebody else’s program without proper authorization is software piracy and is unethical. Intellectual property is a form of ownership, and may be protected by copyright laws. 9. Thou shalt think about the social consequences of the program you write: You have to think about computer issues in a more general social framework: Can the program you write be used in a way that is harmful to society? For example, if you are working for an animation house, and are producing animated films for children, you are responsible for their contents. Do the animations include scenes that can be harmful to children? In the United States, the Communications Decency Act was an attempt by lawmakers to ban certain types of content from Internet websites to protect young children from harmful material. That law was struck down because it violated the free speech principles in that country's constitution. The discussion, of course, is going on. 10. Thou shalt use a computer in ways that show consideration and respect: Just like public buses or banks, people using computer communications systems may find themselves in situations where there is some form of queuing and you have to wait for your turn and generally be nice to other people in the environment. The fact that you cannot see the people you are interacting with does not mean that you can be rude to them.